11/25/22, 1:02 PM A DAY OF TERROR: NEWS ANALYSIS; Awaiting the Aftershocks - The New York Times
https://www.nytimes.com/2001/09/12/us/a-day-of-terror-news-analysis-awaiting-the-aftershocks.html 1/5
A DAY OF TERROR: NEWS ANALYSIS
By R. W. Apple Jr.
Sept. 12, 2001
See the article in its original context from  
September 12, 2001, Section A, Page 1 Buy Reprints
VIEW ON TIMESMACHINE
TimesMachine is an exclusive benefit for home
delivery and digital subscribers.
Today's devastating and astonishingly well-coordinated attacks on the World Trade Center
towers in New York and on the Pentagon outside of Washington plunged the nation into a
warlike struggle against an enemy that will be hard to identify with certainty and hard to
punish with precision.
The whole nation -- to a degree the whole world -- shook as hijacked airliners plunged into
buildings that symbolize the financial and military might of the United States. The sense of
security and self-confidence that Americans take as their birthright suffered a grievous
blow, from which recovery will be slow. The aftershocks will be nearly as bad, as hundreds
and possibly thousands of people discover that friends or relatives died awful, fiery deaths.
Scenes of chaos and destruction evocative of the nightmare world of Hieronymus Bosch,
with smoke and debris blotting out the sun, were carried by television into homes and
workplaces across the nation. Echoing Franklin D. Roosevelt's description of the attack on
Pearl Harbor as an event ''which will live in infamy,'' Gov. George E. Pataki of New York, a
Republican, spoke of ''an incredible outrage'' and Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York,
a Democrat, spoke of ''a dastardly attack.''
But mere words were inadequate vessels to contain the sense of shock and horror that
people felt.
A DAY OF TERROR: NEWS ANALYSIS; Awaiting the
Aftershocks
https://www.nytimes.com/2001/09/12/us/a-day-of-terror-news-analysis-
awaiting-the-aftershocks.html
https://store.nytimes.com/collections/new-york-times-page-reprints?utm_source=nytimes&utm_medium=article-page&utm_campaign=reprints
https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/2001/09/12/147630.html
https://www.nytimes.com/

11/25/22, 1:02 PM A DAY OF TERROR: NEWS ANALYSIS; Awaiting the Aftershocks - The New York Times
https://www.nytimes.com/2001/09/12/us/a-day-of-terror-news-analysis-awaiting-the-aftershocks.html 2/5
As Washington struggled to regain a sense of equilibrium, with warplanes and heavily
armed helicopters crossing overhead, past and present national security officials earnestly
debated the possibility of a Congressional declaration of war -- but against precisely whom,
and in what exact circumstances? Warships were maneuvering to protect New York and
Washington. The North American Air Defense Command, which had seemed to many a relic
of the cold war, adopted a posture of heightened alert and suddenly seemed relevant.
Disappointing some of his political advisers and allies, who felt he should have returned to
Washington at once from a trip to Florida to symbolize that the government was functioning,
President Bush headed instead to Offutt Air Force Base near Omaha, where a more secure
command post was available. At the height of the Cuban missile crisis, when the sense of
danger was just as palpable, John F. Kennedy stayed in Washington.
The president flew back to Washington tonight, escorted by F-15 and F-16 fighters, as
leaders of both parties closed ranks behind him with pledges of support and a stirring
rendition of ''God Bless America.'' In a brief, earnest televised speech, he said the day had
taken ''thousands of lives'' and generated ''a quiet, unyielding anger'' in the nation. He
promised that those who harbored terrorists would be treated as harshly as the terrorists
themselves.
For Mr. Bush the attacks constituted a threat and an opportunity. A minority president, just
a few months into his term, derided by many as intellectually inadequate for his job, he is
likely to be judged, at least in the months ahead, on whether he can take command and act
decisively.
Will he prove to be a Jimmy Carter, whose presidency was poisoned by his inability to
resolve the Iranian hostage crisis? Or will he enhance his reputation, as Ronald Reagan did
after the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger and as Bill Clinton did after the Oklahoma
City bombing?
Samuel Popkin, a political scientist at the University of California at San Diego, who worked
in the presidential campaign of Al Gore, said: ''Many Americans have come to consider
politics irrelevant in recent years. Now politicians matter again, and the president, in his
role as commander in chief, becomes our focal point.''
In a statement made at an air base in Louisiana, Mr. Bush said that ''the resolve of our great
nation is being tested'' and pledged that the test would be met. He is being tested as well, far
more severely than ever before.
Senator John McCain of Arizona, Mr. Bush's sometime Republican rival, said that he was
confident the culprits would be caught and severely punished and that the president would
''ensure something like this will never happen again.'' Together, the two men's comments set

11/25/22, 1:02 PM A DAY OF TERROR: NEWS ANALYSIS; Awaiting the Aftershocks - The New York Times
https://www.nytimes.com/2001/09/12/us/a-day-of-terror-news-analysis-awaiting-the-aftershocks.html 3/5
the bar very high -- perhaps too high.
No doubt the public will rise to the challenge as best it can; many of those in the buildings
hit today reacted with almost supernatural calm. But Mr. Bush alone must decide how to
retaliate and against whom, and he will be operating in a murky area.
''This went far beyond anything we had expected,'' a senior intelligence official conceded.
''We're better than we used to be at monitoring terrorist activities, but today makes it
obvious we are not nearly good enough.''
It follows, then, that preventing another attack will be very difficult. And while it is evidently
easier to identify malefactors after an attack than it is to predict their activities, many
experts cautioned against assuming, for example, that today's attacks were the handiwork
of Osama bin Laden.
Even if Washington concludes that his organization or some other foreign terrorist group
was responsible, devising an appropriate response will present a number of complications.
For one thing, bombs and rockets tend to kill the innocent as well as the guilty. As a
Democratic senator said, ''You're likely to bomb a city or a village with 100 terrorists and
end up with 400 or 500 when the warplanes have flown away.''
Some strategists suggested that Mr. Bush might mount a ground attack on bin Laden's
headquarters, which are believed to be somewhere in Afghanistan, much as Woodrow
Wilson sent American troops into Mexico before World War I to capture Pancho Villa dead
or alive. But they did not get him. And Afghanistan has proved resistant, throughout its
history, to foreign forces trying to operate there.
If the United States develops solid evidence that any country aided the perpetrators of
today's attacks, said Richard C. Holbrooke, ambassador to the United Nations under the
Clinton administration, a declaration of war against that country might be appropriate and
retaliation against it should certainly be undertaken in short order.
Another consideration is the attitude of the Middle Eastern oil states to any retaliatory
attack by the United States, which remains uncertain.
Many Americans, particularly those old enough to remember Dec. 7, 1941, compared today's
events to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. But then, after the first few minutes of
confusion it was evident that the planes were Japanese -- they had military markings on
their wings, instead of airline names on their fuselages, as was the case today. Militarily
daring as the Doolittle raid on Tokyo months later may have been, there was no doubt that it
hit the right target.

11/25/22, 1:02 PM A DAY OF TERROR: NEWS ANALYSIS; Awaiting the Aftershocks - The New York Times
https://www.nytimes.com/2001/09/12/us/a-day-of-terror-news-analysis-awaiting-the-aftershocks.html 4/5
This was Pearl Harbor redux without the face of an enemy. In today's more anomalous
situation, Mr. Bush is likely to avail himself more fully than he has to date of the knowledge,
experience and prestige of his secretary of state, retired Gen. Colin L. Powell. The president
''needs Colin like he's never needed him before,'' an administration official said.
It appears possible that the attacks will undercut Mr. Bush's campaign for a missile defense
shield by suggesting that such a shield would concentrate American resources on seeking
protection against the wrong kind of threat. People who wish the United States ill ''don't
need missiles to do this country harm,'' Professor Popkin argued, ''and we saw that clearly
this morning.''
On the other hand, the attacks might persuade the American public that everything possible
should be done, no matter what the cost, to protect the nation in any way possible.
It will be up to Mr. Bush to make that case. If he makes it well, it will be harder for the
Democrats to mount a partisan assault on his plan.
It will be up to Mr. Bush as well, perhaps even more important, to keep the country from
entering a kind of psychic bomb shelter, reluctant to make decisions, take chances, even to
fly from one city to another after the four hijackings involved in today's campaign of terror.
One of the most important contributions to Londoners' morale during the Battle of Britain
was made by King George VI, who calmly toured the city despite the blitz.
Inevitably, the attacks will make daily life in the United States more complicated. Security
will be tightened at private buildings and federal offices. Airport checks will be stricter and
more frequent, requiring passengers to arrive earlier. In general, it will be harder to get
about.
At past moments of national tension, like the Communist challenge following World War II,
civil liberties have come under pressure. Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of
Delaware, warned today that ''if we alter our basic freedoms, our civil liberties, change the
way we function as a democratic society, then we will have lost the war before it has begun
in earnest.''
And what of the nation's economy, the main preoccupation of Washington, the president and
much of the nation until this morning? Although the stock market remained closed today,
Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's counselor, was at pains to state at a briefing this afternoon that
the rest of the economic system functioned normally. But it was by no definition a normal
day, and sooner or later its hellish events are bound to affect the economy in some way --
probably not for the better.

11/25/22, 1:02 PM A DAY OF TERROR: NEWS ANALYSIS; Awaiting the Aftershocks - The New York Times
https://www.nytimes.com/2001/09/12/us/a-day-of-terror-news-analysis-awaiting-the-aftershocks.html 5/5
A version of this article appears in print on , Section A, Page 1 of the National edition with the headline: A DAY OF TERROR: NEWS ANALYSIS;
Awaiting the Aftershocks


